---
title: Scales
sect: 3
abstract: >
  Each element of the operation can be implemented at a variety of different scales, with a degree of mixing and matching or hybrid approaches available. The primary determining factors of the appropriate scale are access to space, funding, and feedstock sources. But other considerations are also relevant. For instance, operating at the fully-mechanized scale for processing would allow us to divert significantly more waste from landfills, but the corresponding reliance on machinery carries an increase in carbon emissions produced during processing. The trade-offs are subtle, and it's not always clear in which direction the scales tip.
---

## Collection scales

### Bike servicing

This scale involves using specially outfitted bicycles to collect and transport food waste to the processing facility. The most natural collection model for this scale is the *Registered pick-up* model, where bicycles tow collection bins and travel to different households, emptying customer bins into the bike-bins. It is less suited to the *Pop-up drop-off* and *Semi-permanent station* models because of the extraneous materials (tabling materials, cleaning supplies) that must be transported.

Setting a maximum carrying load of around 200 pounds, a single bike servicer could feasibly transport a single, fully-filled Toter bin.{% note food-weight %} This corresponds to about 16 households serviced once weekly.{% note drop-off-size %}

The primary virtue of this model is its completely carbon neutral environmental profile. It also has a relatively low start-up cost; while some customization of the bike fleet is required, bikes are much cheaper than trucks. An amount of good-will is generated by operating at this scale. It is a unique approach that people will notice, especially if the bikes are equipped with advertizing signage. And it fits well within the broader environmental message of the organiztion. If we were to complement this scale with the *Sustainably-mechanized* processing scale, we can convey a coherent message of environmental concern, and demonstrate our mission in our practice. The exact economic value of this good-will generating quality is difficult to pin down, but we don't think it should be dismissed.

This model is limited by the carrying capacity of a bike as well as the terrain that the cyclist must traverse.{% note bike-snow %} It is also limited economically in that it requires a certain amount of [route density](https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Fundamentals_of_Transportation/Network_Design_and_Frequency#Route_design) to make the quantity collected worth the staff time involved. It is also worth emphasizing that this model is labor intensive. The staff member assigned to this job must have certain abilities that not everyone in the labor pool will have. And since collection will probably be a full time job, the possibility of lost staff time due to stress and injuries must be accounted for.

### Truck servicing

This scale uses pickup trucks to collect food waste and transport it to the processing site. At this scale, we can implement all of the collection models listed above. The truck would need to be fitted with a lift-assist mechanism for loading and unloading of Toters. For the *Semi-permanent disposal stations* model, the truck would also need a water tank and spray mechanism for cleaning.

This scale greatly increases diversion capacity as a fully loaded pickup truck can carry 12 32-gallon Toters.{% note truck-bed-size %} Carrying capacity is reduced if the truck is required to carry cleaning or tabling materials.

Start-up cost is higher for this scale, and there is an environmental cost associated with truck transportation.

## Processing scales

### Manually powered

This scale involves constructing windrow compost piles that are turned by hand (with pitchforks) with hand dumping of Toters and mixing of ingredients. This method has the virtues of allowing for immediate start-up at very low cost and having no negative environmental impact.

At this scale, the amount of material that can be diverted from landfills is restricted. Manual processing takes more time, and the added labor demands put added stress on the staff. These restrictions can be mitigated if the operation has a reliable volunteer base.

### Sustainably mechanized

Dumping and mixing of ingredients are done with a sustainably powered tool, such as a bike composter.{% note bike-composter %} Windrows can be turned by hand, or piles can be aerated using a [solar-powered blower system](https://www.biocycle.net/2015/11/16/evolving-into-food-scraps-composting/).

This scale has a net negative carbon footprint, and it expands the processing capacity over the manual scale by cutting the labor demands. But it has a significant start-up cost. The bike composters are not in production and must be custom made. And solar panels are not cheap; they also require maintenance.

### Fully mechanized

Dumping of materials can be mechanized using a [Toter Cart Lifter](http://www.toter.com/professional/category/organic-cart-lifters). Mixing, pile construction, and turning can be performed with a [skid steer loader](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Skid-steer_loader). Turning can alternatively be replaced by powering ASP blowers from the energy grid.

This scale greatly increases the diversion capabilities of the operation. The costs involve an increased carbon footprint from the fuel burning engines of the machines. Space demands are also increased both from the new amounts of material taken in and from the buffer space needed to operate and store the machinery.

While the lure of increased waste diversion is strong, this scale doesn't clearly respect the spirit of the community building mission. Machines are noisy and smelly. A compost site at this scale is best located in a rural or industrial area. But this sort of relocation moves the waste management point farther from the source, and it isolates the operation from the community it serves. Integration within the community is important for the demonstration and education facets of the program, which are vital to the greater waste diversion goal.

### Distributed

We can respect the spirit of localism while also diverting greater amounts of waste by distributing our composting efforts across a number of processing sites. This allows us to further minimize transportation costs by sending collections to the nearest site. We can potentially leverage community spirit by getting local volunteers to assist at a nearby site.

Of course, such a scale carries an increased staffing demand. We may be able to coordinate operation of multiple sites with a single *Processing Manager*, but staff demands will no doubt be greater than would be required to expand the size of a single site.

An additional consideration is that there is an economy of scale with composting. Larger piles heat up more quickly and reach higher temperatures. Thus, they can break down more (and more stubborn) material. A distributed system would probably be unable to divert as much material as a unified site with the same effective size, though I don't have direct evidence for this claim.{% note colorado-regs %}

## Distribution scales

### Bulk, unsifted compost mulch

The most easily implementable distribution scale involves using our Toters to transport finished compost to customers, and allowing customers to take finished compost off our site in their own receptacles.

This scale involves no sifting, and dumping of Toters at the destination must be done by hand, so there are some limitations to the services we can provide at this scale.

### Bagged, screened compost soil amendment

If we can acquire a screening implement, such as a [trommel screener](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trommel_screen) (potentially [bike-powered](https://www.flickr.com/photos/gowanuscanalconservancy/9128348200)), we can distribute smaller quantities of bagged material to customers for soil amendment purposes.

### Bulk, screened compost soil amendment

The screening process is likely to be a bottleneck in the distribution because it is labor intensive. But if we can mechanize the process, we could potentially distribute larger quantities of screened compost to customers as a top-dressing.
